60 Minutes rewind
Alexi navalny is the leader of the
opposition in Russia who has survived an
assassination attempt by poisoning
he's won in a long list of Vladimir
Putin's critics who have been victims of
Unsolved shootings suspicious suicides
and poisonings
we first met Alexi navalny three years
ago when he was running for president
against Putin
now navalny is recuperating in Berlin
where we went this past week after
Germany granted a special permission to
travel there despite coveted
restrictions
when we sat down with navali he told us
he was on an airplane on August 20th
when he began to feel strange and then
very very sick
I said to the flight attendant and I
kind of shocked him with my statement
well I was poisoned and I'm gonna die
and I immediately lay down under his
feet Alexi navalny was on a flight to
Moscow from Siberia where he'd been
campaigning against Putin's party in a
local election when he collapsed with no
pain but knowing he was dying actually
every cell of your body just telling you
that's buddy we are done one of the
other passengers turned on his phone and
captured navalny moaning in anguish
[Applause]
pilate made an emergency landing in
ohmsk where Medics thinking navalny must
be a drug addict administered the usual
treatment for an overdose and rushed him
to a local hospital where they said he
wasn't poisoned but wouldn't let him
leave for days well it was a big fight
and they thought that after 48 Hours
these these poisons would be untraceable
and they just keep me there until this
48 hours will be gone navalny is under
constant surveillance his wife Yulia
says government agents were at the
hospital controlling access to her
husband and she believes calling the
shots at the time navalny was in a coma
unaware that his wife Yulia was waging a
public campaign to encourage Western
diplomatic pressure and did you write a
letter to Putin yeah I did it Dear Mr
Putin free my husband I wrote like I
insist that he should do it I demand you
free my husband yeah it was a online
campaign let him out and Putin thought
it would be safe for him uh just let me
out after 48 hours so after 48 Hours the
Russian government allowed him to be
flown by air ambulance to a hospital in
Berlin known for its experience with
victims of poison attacks and I gather
they suspected poison right away
uh yes of course meanwhile his team in
Siberia searched his hotel room
collecting things navalny may have
touched like this water bottle which the
doctors in Berlin sent along with a
blood sample to a German military lab to
see exactly what the poison was and the
answer was novichuk they discovered
another chalk this nerve agent in my
blood inside of body on my body and all
this bottle from the hotel so that's why
we now we know that I was poisoned in
the hotel because I uh well it's again
it's just a pure speculation because no
one knows what what happened exactly but
I think that when I was maybe put some
clothes with these with this poison on
me I touch it with the hand and then I
sip from the bottle so this Nerf agent
was not inside of a bottle but on the
bottle Nova chalk is a highly toxic
nerve agent said to be 10 times more
potent than sarin gas labs in France and
Sweden corroborated the finding there's
no doubt it was military-grade novichok
it's maybe it's the most toxic
agents invented by the humans so it's
new type of novichok which prove that
unfortunately Putin have a developing
new program of this chemical weapon
which is forbidden the Russians have
said that they destroyed all these
chemical weapons that's why actually
they deny everything because it means
that they still have this Navy choke so
it means they're not just violating with
the keeping it they are continue to
improve it and there's no doubt that
Russia is the only place that where that
could have come from this is absolutely
correct it's a banned substance
I think for Putin why he's using this
chemical weapon one to do both
kill me and you know terrify others it's
something really scary with the people
just drop dead without there are no guns
there are no shots and in a couple of
hours you will be dead and without any
traces on your body it's something
terrifying and Putin is enjoying it you
have said you think that that Mr Putin's
responsible I don't think I'm sure that
he's responsible Putin's spokesman
Dimitri peskov says the charge is
completely baseless and unacceptable but
Angela Merkel of Germany and Emmanuel
macron of France have persuaded the
European Union to impose sanctions over
this well all these leaders have signed
on except Donald Trump
yes I have noticed it is it important to
you that he condemned this action so I
think it's extremely important
that everyone of course including and
maybe in the first row president of
United States to be very against using
chemical weapon in the 21th century but
why would Putin want to poison Alexei
navalny when we first met navalny three
years ago he was running against Putin
for president he had made a name for
himself by getting his hands on
incriminating internal financial
documents related to high-level
officials and posting them on a Blog did
these documents that you got prove
corruption absolutely I work as a
whistleblower and I'm not afraid to
announce the names he says he found that
the kremlin's Inner Circle was
accumulating vast amounts of wealth and
published pictures of multiple homes and
Yachts he moved on to airing
documentaries on YouTube with video of
the official's lavish lifestyle and it's
uh it's something very special about Mr
Putin that he's crazy about money
personal money about his family being
rich his friends like all his people who
was served here with him with the in the
KGB all of them they are billionaires
that's why fighting corruption means for
him that he's fighting me
you know I'm smiling because here you
are you have survived the most potent
nerve agent there is and you are as
fiery and worked up about your about
Putin and what's going on in this
country as you were when I met you a
couple of years ago well I'm galette I'm
glad that I survived and his blog
inflamed so much outrage in 2017 that
tens of thousands of Russians took to
the streets against Putin when navalny
called for a second round of protests
three months later he was arrested
before he even left his apartment
building he's been jailed so many times
he's lost count he's been beaten had
green dye with acids splashed in his
face and now he can add poisoning to his
resume and blame President Putin well
how can you say that why wouldn't it be
one of the oligarchs whom you've
embarrassed by as you say exposing their
corruption even for oligarch it's
impossible to get this Navy chalk it's
not something you can buy in the store
even if you have a million of the
billions of dollars maybe more important
you cannot use it you will kill yourself
and everyone around because it's very
difficult to you know contain it yes and
then this huge cover-up operation there
is no criminal investigation so far if
if Putin is not responsible why there is
no investigation and look what they're
doing right now like uh Putin with the
conversation with the French President
macron he said well navalny poisoned
himself
seriously Mr Putin told the president of
France that you poisoned yourself yes it
was just to you know annoy him the story
will continue after this
Putin is contending with rounds of
protests in the Far Eastern part of the
country with people taking to the
streets for the past three months
navalny thinks the attempt on his life
is connected despite his controlling
police judges courts media and
everything still he's like he
understands that he's surrounded by
protest and it's increasing so that's
why his they decided to
you know export Extreme Measures
this is what he looked like just a month
ago soon after his doctors brought him
out of an induced coma rail thin with a
sickly pallor this photo was taken the
first day he saw his children after
being taken off a ventilator so you were
in a coma and then you woke up and what
happened after this coma I just jumped
to the
long period of kind of crazy
hallucinations and several you know
steps of realizing where I am who I am
and I could not speak and I could not
write how has this affected your family
well it was it was a difficult situation
but they stand it and including their
children
son is 12 and your daughter is in
college right
those are tough ages to realize that
your father came close to being
assassinated did they say to you
pop dad you have to stop absolutely not
no absolutely not my eye I'm very lucky
man because I have all support from my
family
you'd almost have to at this point yeah
navalny his wife his bodyguard and I
went out for a walk in front of the
Brandenburg gate in Berlin and a Phalanx
of police showed up so you you certainly
traveled with a lot of protection
yes I have a lot of security he's under
the protection of the German government
because there's concern he could be the
target of another poisoning and yet he
said he's determined to return to Moscow
in a couple of months as soon as he's a
hundred percent and resume his work
where he left off campaigning against
Vladimir Putin you know you used to be
known as the man who had no fear
but what about your family do you ever
think that you were putting them in
danger
that is the toughest part yes I don't
feel any fear but children what is this
kind of really horrible thought if they
will try to use this Navy chalk
somewhere around my apartment where my
children is coming like you know this
door or something but everyone can touch
it but anyway we should fight these
people because they will never stop they
will poison someone else they will
poison more people well how do you feel
now
are you back totally back you seem to be
I still need some time to recover and
I'm working on it but you do go to rehab
do you go every day yes to learn from
the Screech how to how to move how to do
some things they're interesting that
um I feel kind of a bit of wooden or a
thin man like from The Wizard of Oz
because the body lost all flexibility at
all interesting how it's work I have no
idea it's now it's
difficult movies for me for example pick
something from the ground what about the
psychological of effect
of having
knowing that somebody tried to kill you
came that close you know
uh I think it's a it's a good thing it's
very useful for politicians maybe facing
that once because it's changing a bit so
maybe ironically I became kind of more
human after this facing that
