is a conductor operating at triple Tempo
at once the director of three major
orchestras in Philadelphia in his
hometown of Montreal and in the
Metropolitan Opera in New York which is
pinned on him the hopes for rebounding
from financial crisis in the Bold
revamping of its artistic Mission not
that you'll catch naysay sagath sweating
it at 48 he's obliterating The
Stereotype of the strict unapproachable
Maestro joyfully keeping his musicians
in time his hair bleached platinum
blonde in a smile all but welded to his
face known as much for his versatility
as his virtuosity Sega as we first told
you in May is reimagining the role of
the modern Orchestra and its place in
the soundtrack of the modern city
the story will continue in a moment
[Music]
forgiven for double checking your ticket
to make sure you weren't at Madison
Square Garden this is New York's
Metropolitan Opera
and in this corner the Maestro yanique
de Zay Sagan only the third music
director in the Mets 140-year history
he's conducting a jazz infused Opera
about a real-life boxing champion of the
1960s and 70s all this is a radical key
change from the standard met lineup of
Puccini and Verdi in Wagner
oh
[Applause]
nice again's eyes reach musicians in the
pit in vocalists on stage seemingly all
at once the bounce in his baton
consecrates every note
this is the cathartic moment where oh my
God this is so amazing this is so
impressive this is so intense this is so
emotional and this cathartic experience
we feel transformed
as a different person before and after
listening to these pieces there seems to
be something
sacred about your making music by
overstating that no no you're not I try
never to take myself too seriously but
music has to be taken seriously
a Pianist by training who's conducted
the great philharmonics of Europe Nazi
Sega brings his sensibility to Bear up
and down the Eastern seaboard
Philadelphia he is the current custodian
of what's been a world-renowned
Orchestra for more than a century we
visited in February as the city
celebrated the contract extension
through 2030 of a maestro known to All
by his first name
that morning
yanique and his musicians made the
pilgrimage up the famed Rocky steps clad
in Eagles gear he sees the orchestra not
unlike a sport team as an instrument of
cohesion in the community hey hi
everyone Hi in the afternoon naze Saga
stopped by Philly's Premier performing
arts high school to guest conduct the
students
if we were to agree to bite even more in
every note like
[Music]
450 miles due north back home in
Montreal
[Applause]
they speak his language in more ways
than one he is a lifetime contract with
the orchest Metropolitan Daisy Sega has
led these musicians for more than 20
years that's his husband Pierre turville
on viola the depth of his connection
here produces hypnotic sound listen to
this a rehearsal of sibelius's Fifth
Symphony
thank you
some weeks yanique leads performances in
all three cities just last Saturday he
conducted a matinee in New York and the
evening program in Philly then again
what is a conductor if not someone able
to synchronize I can't deny that it's a
very demanding schedule and even the
word schedule if should I ever retire I
want to ban that word from my life do
you have a favorite child among the
three orchestras you conduct
you cannot ask me this
yet one child in particular and isn't
this always the case demands extra
attention and TLC can we have more
importance in the third party
at the Met the country's largest
Performing Arts institution we watched
him Wrangle 250 musicians and singers
for a production of vodkar's lowengrid a
stalwart Opera that gave us the bridal
chorus
in naze sagaz interpretations do right
by the Masters what I want is to respect
what Wagner wrote in the score
so it's very poetic and magical what's
really individual is me being completely
at the surface of the composer
took over the podium here in 2018 after
his predecessor was fired for
allegations of sexual misconduct facing
weak ticket sales and perpetually
strapped for cash the Met has had a hard
time rebounding from covid and is dipped
into its endowment to cover around 10
percent of its 300 million dollar
operating budget Maestro to the pit
please they've tried courting a younger
more diverse crowd here before but
naysay sagaz doing it prestissimo
speeding up the tempo of change he's
betting that new composers and
contemporary operas some adapted from
best-selling books and Hollywood Hits
will bring in a wider audience and Shore
up the bottom line and early results
suggest tease right
yeah
a recent premiere of the Opera fire Shut
Up In My Bones based on a memoir by
journalist Charles blow and composed by
jazz legend Terence Blanchard sold out
and outsold Verdi's classic Rigoletto
here that season what's more half the
seats were filled by first time met
goers it's great such a success and yet
I'm thinking that means that all of
these people never felt compelled or
dare I say welcome to come here and that
is my mission the first timers were 50
you saw that as both a Triumph but also
sounds like an indictment mostly it's a
tremendous encouragement to continue in
that Vein The Met will put on 17 new and
recent works over the next five seasons
this at a place that once went near
decades without staging a new Opera this
spring brought Champion another Terence
Blanchard composition based on the
complicated life of Emile Griffin a
bisexual prize fighter what can't you
write an opera about
nothing how do you thread that needle
between
experimenting and bringing in new
audiences but also not upsetting the
traditionalists the truth is I'm not
necessarily concerned about not
upsetting traditionalists I think people
who love our art form are still going to
love it because we're still going to
play some Puccini and Verdi to me it's
it's never about not upsetting and if
some people are upset well too bad they
just don't have to come to everything we
do and that's about as prickly as you'll
hear him get Beyond yanique's
musicianship his real Hallmark might be
his light touch okay let's do it one
more time take this rehearsal for
Champion the first time the orchestra
Rhythm Section and singers played the
piece together but also that rare
collaboration between a conductor and a
living composer he gets it Terence
Blanchard a seven-time Grammy winner is
the first black composer in the Mets
history he gets the story he gets the
whole notion of bringing these different
styles of music together
one of the rehearsals with the orchestra
he said listen
don't follow me listen to the drums most
conductors don't do that I'm there for
you okay cool we saw firsthand yannick's
responsiveness when soprano Latonya
Moore asked him to slow things down
[Music]
we go in here slower I just want to
really get everything out yeah so right
from the base
is there a worry though that your
Authority might be undercut by all these
Good Vibes I think it's the old concept
of authority which is because uh I say
so and because I can fire you I'm gonna
tell you what to do that's not working
anymore and I will go even further even
the masters of the past Toscanini for
example
fantastic musician of course I respect a
lot of this but you can hear when some
recordings with Toscanini especially
with singers you could hear the fear in
their voice and to me that's not
expressive you can discern that oh yeah
oh I'm sure you could
oh like they're trembling because they
fear because already to open your mouth
on the stage is already nerve-wracking
if you have a conductor who's waiting
for you to fail it's going to be even
more nerve-wracking the music doesn't
win
[Music]
the music wins when everybody feels free
to express who they are
yanique found that freedom for himself
his earliest grade school
here he is leading an imaginary
Orchestra in front of classmates
he studied at the conservatory in
Montreal a music town with a church on
every corner he led the church choir in
his teens and trained his ear in less
formal ways too I would go to a record
store and buy CDs and discover
repertoire after repertoire every
Symphony by Brahms every Symphony by
Beethoven by Bruckner by mother I wanted
then to hear every version and by every
version of every Symphony and I'm not
shy to say that it it's it's shaped a
lot of who I am as a musician because
eventually I became a collection of like
12 000 CDs last winter we visited his
parents at yanique's childhood home the
kind of folks who keep every clipping
Ian told us when he was a boy he
collected thousands and thousands maybe
10 000 CDs more than that he wasn't
exaggerating no no no no no not at all
not that tall where did you put them he
made their shelves
and it was his mom who managed janik's
schedule throughout his 30s as he were
worked the international circuit London
Vienna Rotterdam guests conducting 100
orchestras
he made his met debut in 2009
persistence paying off and if today he's
living the dream he's also conscious to
live his life he and Pierre go on the
road together we met them at a spot in
Old Montreal where they had celebrated
their wedding they make a point of going
out after every performance friends
family members of the orchestra
colleagues some people together to eat
well and drink a little
moments in the couple's history we were
surprised when yanique highlighted this
one
at the time Pierre and Celine Dion
serenaded him on a popular Quebec talk
show a kind of musical this is your life
of course it's one of the most moving
moments of my life not everybody can say
that they've sung a uh duet
and Barbra Streisand
um
[Laughter]
maybe it's a hard turn from Celine to
the Met for most conductors not so for
yanique
yes he takes music seriously but resists
being too precious about it you have to
trust the Acoustics he's too busy
smudging boundaries that have long kept
some audiences away from classical music
and Opera
foreign
I would love that when I finish my time
on Earth that no one ever says again oh
classical music is not for me it's for
the educated it's for the rich it's for
the white whatever it is you know I want
everyone to feel oh yeah I could like it
some of it I don't like Mozart but I
like Blanche fine but at least you feel
that you could go there because there
would be something for you what would
Puccini and Verdi and Wagner make of all
this one suspects they would join in the
Applause they after all were Once
musical boundary pushers too
[Applause]
for a look at how 60 Minutes reports its
stories go to 60 minutes overtime.com
